From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bavaro. This is the daily.
[music] Today, the story of how the
fallout from Alex Py's [music] death
forced President Trump to change course
in Minneapolis and the [music] debate
over whether those changes are real or
merely symbolic. I spoke with White
House reporters [music] Zolan Kano
Youngs and Tyler Pager.
[music]
It's Wednesday, January 28th.
Zolan and Tyler, we are having this
conversation with you on Tuesday
afternoon at this moment when President
Trump has clearly decided to try to
telegraph that he wants to change course
or at least change the tone around his
administration's immigration crackdown
in Minneapolis following the killing of
Alex Prey and all of the outrage it
inspired. And we're going to talk about
how meaningful or superficial that
change really is. But Tyler, let's first
talk through what's actually happened
behind the scenes in the days since
Freddy's death.
>> So Michael, one of the interesting
things just about this weekend is that
it's one of the rare weekends in the
winter where Donald Trump is in
Washington and not in Palm Beach,
Florida at his club and residence, Mara
Lago. M
>> and the reason that Trump stayed in
Washington was because he was hosting a
special premiere at the White House for
the new documentary about his wife
Melania.
>> Right.
>> And so the president is spending a lot
of the weekend in the Oval Office and in
the dining room off the Oval Office
watching media coverage of what's going
on in Minneapolis and the shooting of
Alex Prey. He spent a lot of the time
watching Fox News but flips around
channels. Another American citizen has
been shot dead by federal agents in
Minneapolis. The Trump administration is
defending the agent's actions this week.
>> And just saw this caffany of voices
criticizing the response and the killing
of this man in Minneapolis.
>> It should freak the American public out
that the Trump administration
lies this easily. will lie to your face
when you can see the evidence for
yourself.
>> He was called by the Trump
administration officials a domestic
terrorist when all he had in his hand
was a cell phone.
>> Americans don't like what they're seeing
right now. Nobody likes feds coming into
their state. And so what's the goal
right now?
>> [music]
>> And this criticism is notable and rare
because it's not just Democrats and it's
not the usual loudest critics in the
Republican party that are pushing back
on him.
>> Senator Bill Cassidy calling the
situation disturbing, writing, "The
credibility of ICE in DHS are at stake."
Senator,
>> you've got Senator Bill Cassidy who said
on social media that the shooting was
incredibly disturbing. Tom Tillis called
for an investigation as well. That's
notable push back against this White
House, particularly a White House that
demands loyalty from its party. And
beyond the Republican lawmakers, even
some sympathetic media figures like Fox
News hosts Trey Gaudy and Maria Barto
were also criticizing the rhetoric from
senior administration officials.
>> Well, you you've collected the evidence,
you said, right? You have the handgun in
your possession.
>> That's right.
And and how was he using that handgun in
terms of threatening Border Patrol? What
was the threat? He had his camera,
right? He was filming it.
[music]
>> And Michael, that's to say nothing of
what Trump would have seen if he tuned
into MS Now or CNN.
>> What do you see when you watch those
videos?
>> An execution. An absolute execution. He
There's no Every angle shows it. and
they continued to fire bullets at him
while his body was lifeless on the
ground
>> where officials were saying that the
government basically gunned down this
man and bungled the response [music]
>> evidence. The lies do more than mislead.
They justify the unjustifiable and in
the absence of accountability from the
Department of Homeland Security, from
ICE, from Customs and Border Protection,
it is up to us to hold on to the truth.
>> [music]
>> Right. I caught some of that coverage
and it was basically the government has
murdered this man and then
systematically lied about what happened
in the face of video that very clearly
contradicted it.
>> Absolutely, Michael. And what the
president was concerned about was not
necessarily the incident itself. You
know, he was disturbed that a man had
been killed. But Michael, what he was
really worried about was that this
chaos, this narrative was overshadowing
all of the progress he felt he has made
on the issue of immigration enforcement
and the border with Mexico. These are
issues that are core to his political
identity. And the president was talking
to aids and allies throughout the
weekend and venting about how the
narrative was being overtaken by this
use of force and by the killing of a man
and it was distracting from the message
that he wanted to be driving home which
was that he had sealed the border and he
was getting rid of in his parliament the
most violent undocumented immigrants in
the country.
>> And when did we start to see him
reacting accordingly? Late Sunday night,
an interview with the Wall Street
Journal published with President Trump
in which he made somewhat measured
comments for him. He actually expressed
a willingness in an investigation into
this shooting and said that his
administration was reviewing the
shooting and that eventually they would
come out determination. These comments
are starkly different from the way the
president was talking about this
shooting even just 24 hours before.
Right. Right. In the initial aftermath,
President Trump once again laid blame on
the victim. He attacked local leaders in
Minnesota. Now he's coming out and
actually saying that they want to take a
look at this. That is really different
than the usual reactionary defense we
see from President Trump when it comes
to anything really involving ICE or his
immigration agenda.
>> Right. And it turns out that ends up
Tyler being kind of just the beginning
of a pretty public pivot that I wonder
if you can keep describing here. Yeah,
it starts very early Monday morning when
the president announces on True Social
that he's sending in Tom Hman, the White
House borders are from Washington to
Minneapolis to lead the operation. And a
few hours later, we learned that Greg
Bevino, a top border patrol official who
had been leading these operations all
over the country, would be leaving
Minneapolis. And it's a clear sign that
changes are underway at least in terms
of personnel in response to this
horrible killing.
>> And the Bavino departure, just to linger
on that for a minute, feels especially
notable because he had literally been on
the ground in Minneapolis very
unapologetically
defending the most aggressive tactics
that ICE and Border Patrol were using.
And because he had told the public
something that turned out to be
completely wrong about Alex Prey and
about his intent and his actions that
was very much contradicted by the videos
that emerged. And so suddenly it felt
like there were consequences for that
conduct.
>> Absolutely, Michael. And I think you
know it wasn't just Bovino who was
spreading these false messages about
Freddy. They were echoed by Christine
Nome, the Secretary of Homeland
Security, Steven Miller, a senior
adviser in the White House, who is the
architect of much of Trump's immigration
agenda. And the president was distancing
himself from those exact messages. He
was not saying that Prey was a domestic
terrorist, as Steven Miller said. And he
also was not saying that Freddy was an
assassin who was trying to inflict mass
harm on Border Patrol agents as
Christine Gnome suggested and Bouvino
did as well. And so those individuals
who were really spreading the most
inaccurate messages about the victim
were sort of being pushed aside. And on
top of that deciding to to pull back
Greg Pavino, we also hear that President
Trump is having these phone calls with
Governor Tim Waltz and uh the mayor of
Minneapolis as well, Jacob Fry. This is
also pretty remarkable. Just a couple
days earlier, President Trump was
attacking these same officials, blaming
them for the unrest that we are seeing
in Minneapolis.
>> Right. In fact, his Department of
Justice is actively investigating both
of them criminally for blocking his
immigration crackdown. But suddenly,
he's having what by all accounts, I
think, are somewhat diplomatic phone
calls with
>> He doesn't just talk to them, he also
describes it kind of positively as well.
>> Mhm. And based on the readouts from the
calls, Michael, it seems that they
really did get into some substantive
issues.
>> But I had two very good talks. I had
Jacob Fry and I had Governor Wals. And I
mean they were they were great calls. So
>> as you know the president made clear
that he wanted to enhance cooperation
between state and local officials with
federal officials on the ground and the
Democratic leaders also pushed back.
>> First of all, I I asked that we have a
fair and independent um investigation
into the murder of both Renee Good and
Alex. um and uh that we have to be able
to do that and and he said I we'll we'll
look at that. We'll we'll take a look at
that.
>> They said they wanted a real
investigation into the shootings of
Minneapolis residents and also an
readout from Tim Walls's office said
that the president agreed to look into
reducing the number of federal agents in
Minnesota.
>> He pledged that look, I'm going to send
Tom Holman in. We'll do things
differently. And really what it seems,
Michael, is that both sides had an
opportunity to raise their own
grievances and maybe had some
breakthroughs,
>> right? And so it felt by Tuesday
afternoon that we ended up in a
situation that we've become kind of
familiar with in the Trump presidency,
which is the administration
has gone too far. People are furious. I
mean, our our colleagues described this
as, and I'm going to quote from them,
one of the gravest political threats to
Trump since his inauguration in this
second term. And the president, based on
everything you're describing here, seems
to understand that and wants to say in
his own way, I get it and I'm ready to
try to diffuse this.
>> Michael, that's right. And I mean, just
to that point, as we're speaking to you
right now, the president just told Fox
News that his administration was going
to work on deescalating a little bit the
situation in Minneapolis. But not a
Trump word, not a word you often hear
from this president. Uh, but look, I
guess that's the big question we have
now moving forward. [music]
Are these just words? You know, is this
just lip service at this point in the
response to intense political backlash
>> or are we uh in the midst here of a real
moment where we could see concrete
change on the ground when it comes to
these kind of federal crackdowns on
American cities. [music]
We'll be right back.
So Tyler Enzo, let's further pursue the
question posed right before the break,
which is amid all these signals and
symbols of some sort of a change in
course and tone from the president, has
anything actually changed on the ground
in Minneapolis where ICE and the Border
Patrol are still very much there and has
the administration's thinking about its
role in the city changed at all?
>> Yeah. So, even if we've seen a a
rhetorical shift here, we really don't
have all that much evidence that we're
seeing a substantial change on the
ground. This operation in Minneapolis
still appears active. We're hearing as
well that roughly a 100 arrests were
recorded in Minneapolis just today. So
at this point, we have not seen that
reality on the ground match the shift in
rhetoric from the president on this
topic.
>> Tyler, what would it look like for
things to actually change on the ground?
One obvious step, Michael, would be that
they pulled back the border patrol
agents and the other federal officials
who are patrolling all across
Minneapolis and other cities where
leaders have said they don't want those
forces.
>> They'd start to reduce the numbers. They
would literally recall these agents,
>> right? And another step could possibly
be that there's firings of President
Trump's aids. There are many critics of
the president and even some of his
allies privately saying someone like
Christine Gnome maybe isn't right for
running the Homeland Security
Department, but the president walked out
of the White House today with Steven
Miller and told reporters that Christine
was doing a great job and she certainly
was not resigning.
>> Right. I mean, I suppose the other sign
of an on the ground change that matched
the rhetoric, to use your word, Zolan,
would be that the administration took
steps to follow through with an
investigation into Alex Py's killing.
They could, for example, name the Border
Patrol agent who shot him. They could
open an investigation into that agent.
They could arrest that agent in theory,
>> right? As of right now, the
investigation into this shooting does
not involve looking into criminal
wrongdoing of the agents that were
involved in this shooting. Right. We've
seen that this administration not only
has blamed the victims of these
shootings, but has also refrained from
actually investigating real wrongdoing
when it comes to the federal agents
involved here. So, that would be an
active step. And you know, yes, ICE does
typically have a presence in all these
cities, but it's worth reminding folks
that we have something different with
this kind of operation, which is that
you have this alphabet soup of federal
agents that are in Minneapolis right
now. It's not a normal ICE deployment.
You also have Border Patrol, which was
involved in this shooting, as well as
other federal agents. So, that's another
step they could take in just sort of
turning this into a more typical ICE
deployment. rather than one where you
have this hodgepodge of federal agents
dawned in camouflage that are now
currently marching through the streets
of Minneapolis.
>> Right. And seemingly with a hair trigger
approach to something as simple as
somebody holding a phone out in front of
them in the case of Alex Prey.
>> That's right. you would not only be
saying as the president, we're going to
deescalate this situation, but actually
taking concrete steps to scale back this
operation, which could then lead to
deescalation as well.
>> Right. I mean, I'm repeating what you
said to a degree, Zolan, but when you
step back and really examine what's
truly different here beyond the
rhetoric, it seems like the answer is
not much. Not much yet, right? And and
that's important because often with
President Trump when you're going
through these news cycles, when he's
facing political blowback, and this one
it's definitely relevant, he kind of all
has this two-handed approach, right?
>> He both has this reactionary defense for
federal agents, for the federal
crackdown, for his agenda. And then at
the very same time, he will try to
distance himself from that same agenda
when it gets political backlash, when it
causes trouble for him.
>> Right. Zolan, when you walked out of the
Oval Office with Tyler a week and a half
ago after your interview with Trump, you
described this as the president
conducting himself like a bystander to
his own presidency and its policies and
its actions.
>> Yes. And I think this is another example
of that, of the president trying to be a
bystander to his own policies. This is
the president that talked about mass
deportations, not only mass
deportations, but deploying federal
agents to American cities,
>> right? And this is what's come with
that. This is also the president that at
times has talked about how law
enforcement could deter crime by holding
quote one really violent day. That's
something he said during his own
campaign. Right. Right.
>> And we have seen many violent days.
That's right. But it seems at least in
this current moment, we're seeing
President Trump as a bystander to his
own policy and not President Trump
aggressively defending his policy no
matter the circumstances. Tyler, if
people sense that this
tone shift is just a tone shift, really
kind of a veneer,
it's clearly not going to satisfy the
fury of motans, of those Republicans in
Congress who are demanding change, who
are demanding hearings, including in the
Senate. And it's especially not going to
satisfy Democrats who are currently
threatening to block funding bills
required to keep the federal government
open through the end of this week.
>> Yeah, Michael, we have not seen the end
of this story. And just as we're talking
now, the president is taking questions
and when he's asked, "Do you plan to
pull agents out of Minnesota?" he says,
"We'll do what'sever appropriate."
That's a decision that the president
gets to make,
>> right? and he's not defining the
parameters by which he would change
course. And I think that's really
notable. And I think those are going to
be the questions that lawmakers are
asking of the administration as they
move forward with these critical
government funding bills. I mean, we
just saw choosing Collins, a Republican
of Maine, who told Christy Gnome that
she wants a pause of ICE enforcement in
Maine and Minnesota. Holan, very
quickly, is there a real risk that the
situation that the president and those
around him have created in a place like
Minneapolis with ICE, with Border
Patrol, could actually lead to some form
of a government shutdown in the next few
days.
>> It's always tough to make a prediction,
particularly when it comes to Congress.
But when you have not only Democrats but
also Republicans who are expressing
concern about the agency at the center
of this operation and as Tyler said, you
also have someone who's incredibly
influential in the appropriations
committee, Susan Collins,
>> also expressing that concern. That is
like a red alert moment for those in the
White House who are anxious about a
government shutdown, right? So, we have
to watch what's going to happen here,
but there are definitely signs that
members of Congress that would be needed
in order to prevent a government
shutdown that they are watching what's
going on in Minneapolis um as well as
other cities when it comes to this
operation.
you just to end this conversation, it
strikes me and Zolan, you talked about
this in the in the very beginning of
this conversation that the president has
just objectively speaking
over the past year quickly achieved many
of his immigration goals. He sealed the
border. He reduced crossings to a
historic low, a trickle.
And then with these deployments of ICE
and Border Patrol in cities like
Minneapolis,
it no longer feels like much of a debate
here. He turned what many
see as a kind of achievement into this
exceptionally dark chapter of his
presidency. And it just didn't need to
be that way.
>> Yes. And you know this policy more than
any other policy, the president has just
been incredibly emboldened. He's been
surrounded by people that will turn his
impulses into actually policy that will
impact people on the ground. He has felt
that he has had the political support of
his own party and for the most part the
country when it comes to this
immigration agenda from the campaign
until now. And yeah, he's he's faced
push back at times, but he has never
really even rhetorically acknowledged
the need to scale back. And now it seems
we are at the point where the president
has realized that he might have overshot
on this agenda item where actually he
went so far on this agenda
that now the optics are actually not
working in his favor.
>> Right. And it is still early in this
cycle and we don't know what's going to
happen next. But we actually do have one
takeaway that we can say already from
this and that's that President Trump
wasn't moved to scale back this
operation upon learning that Renee Good
was shot and killed or upon learning
that Mr. Prey was shot and killed. In
fact, he initially laid the blame on
both of them. He was moved on this when
he heard that it was hurting him
politically.
[music]
That's the guard rail it seems at this
moment for his immigration policy.
[music] And I think that's notable and
it's something we should watch as we try
to report out just how much further this
is going to expand or if this is really
going to be scaled back in a definitive
way.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Zolan and Tyler, thank you very
much. We appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much, Michael.
>> Thank you, Michael.
On [music] Tuesday night, White House
Deputy Chief of Staff Steven Miller
appeared to back away from his original
inaccurate claims [music]
about Alex PR's death. In a statement to
CNN, Miller [music] said that the White
House was now evaluating why the Border
Patrol agents responsible for PR's death
may have failed [music] to follow
government protocols.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
[music] Here's what else you need
another day. On Tuesday night, a man
tried to attack [music] Democratic
Congresswoman Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, a
frequent target [music] of personal
insults from President Trump.
must resign or face impeachment.
>> The attack, which involved a syringe,
>> oh my god, he sprayed something on her.
>> Came during a town hall meeting moments
[music] after Omar called for abolishing
ICE and impeaching [music]
Christine Gnome. The attacker was
quickly tackled and arrested, and Omar
was [music] unheard.
And new census data shows that over the
last year, America's population grew at
one of the slowest [music] rates in the
country's history. A major reason for
the slowdown was the decline in
immigration, [music]
which plunged by more than 50% because
of President Trump's secondterm
policies, combined with a long-term
decline in the [music] American birth
rate. Overall, the country's population
grew by about 1.8 [music]
million people, a growth rate of about
half a percentage [music] point.
Today's episode was produced by Eric
Krupkkey, Mary Wilson, and Rob [music]
Zipco. It was edited by MJ Davis Lynn,
contains music by Marian Lozano, Rowan
Misto, and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by [music] Chris Wood.
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Aboro.
See you [music] tomorrow.